# Benchmarking Alignment Strategies for Hi-C Reads in Metagenomic Hi-C Data
This repository contains the code used in the benchmark paper evaluating alignment strategies for Hi-C reads in metagenomic datasets.

## Description
We selected seven alignment strategies that have been used in Hi-C analyses: BWA MEM -5SP, BWA MEM default, BWA aln default, Bowtie2 default, Bowtie2 –very-sensitive-local, Minimap2 default, and Chromap default. We benchmarked them on one synthetic and seven real-world environments, and evaluated these tools based on the number of inter-contig Hi-C read pairs and their influence on downstream tasks, such as binning quality.

## Getting Started
### 1. Clone the Repository 
To obtain the necessary scripts, clone the repository using the following command:
```
git clone https://github.com/yuw053/MetaHi-C_Benchmark.git
```

### 2. Preprocessing 
<br>
Install BBTools by following the [BBTools installation guide](https://jgi.doe.gov/data-and-tools/software-tools/bbtools/bb-tools-user-guide/installation-guide/).

Once installed, run the preprocessing script:
```
chmod +x preprocessing.sh
./preprocessing.sh WGS_1_FILE_PATH WGS_2_FILE_PATH HIC_1_FILE_PATH HIC_2_FILE_PATH BBTOOLS_PATH OUTPUT_PATH
```
* WGS_1_FILE_PATH: The path to the shotgun library read 1 file. The file should be in .fastq.gz format.
* WGS_2_FILE_PATH: The path to the shotgun library read 2 file. The file should be in .fastq.gz format.
* HIC_1_FILE_PATH: The path to the Hi-C library read 1 file. The file should be in .fastq.gz format.
* HIC_2_FILE_PATH: The path to the Hi-C library read 2 file. The file should be in .fastq.gz format.
* BBTOOLS_PATH: The BBTools directory.
* OUTPUT_PATH: The output directory.
From all the generated .fastq.gz output files, only the following will be used in subsequent steps: WGS_1_CL.fastq.gz, WGS_2_CL.fastq.gz, HIC_1_dedup.fastq.gz, and HIC_2_dedup.fastq.gz.

### 3. Assembly
Create a Conda environment for the assembly and alignment steps:
```
conda env create -f sim3c.yml
conda activate sim3c
```
<br>

Run the assembly script:
```
chmod +x assembly.sh 
./assembly.sh WGS_CL_1_FILE_PATH WGS_CL_2_FILE_PATH OUTPUT_PATH
```
* WGS_CL_1_FILE_PATH: The path to the WGS_1_CL.fastq.gz file generated in Step 2.
* WGS_CL_2_FILE_PATH: The path to the WGS_2_CL.fastq.gz file generated in Step 2.
* OUTPUT_PATH: The output directory.

### 4. Alignment 
Run the alignment script:
```
chmod +x alignment.sh
./alignment.sh ASSEMBLY_FILE_PATH HIC_1_FILE_PATH HIC_2_FILE_PATH OUTPUT_PATH
```
* ASSEMBLY_FILE_PATH: The path to final.contigs.fa file generated in step 3.
* HIC_1_FILE_PATH: The path to HIC_1_dedup.fastq.gz file generated in step 2.
* HIC_2_FILE_PATH: The path to HIC_2_dedup.fastq.gz file generated in step 2.

### 5. MetaCC
Install MetaCC by following the [MetaCC installation guide](https://github.com/dyxstat/MetaCC?tab=readme-ov-file#installation-guide).
<br>
For paired-end reads:
```
chmod +x downstream_pair.sh
./downstream_pair.sh ASSEMBLY_FILE_PATH ALINGMENT_FILE_PATH MODE OUTPUT_PATH
```
* ASSEMBLY_FILE_PATH: The path to final.contigs.fa file generated in step 3.
* ALINGMENT_FILE_PATH: The path to aln_sorted.bam file generated in step 4.
* MODE: Each mode corresponds to one alignment strategy. The following modes are available:
    * bwa_mem_pr_5sp
    * bwa_mem_pr_def
    * minimap2_pr_def
    * chromap
<br>

For single-end reads:
```
chmod +x downstream_single.sh
./downstream_single.sh ASSEMBLY_FILE_PATH ALINGMENT_1_FILE_PATH ALINGMENT_2_FILE_PATH MODE OUTPUT_PATH
```
* ASSEMBLY_FILE_PATH: The path to final.contigs.fa file generated in step 3.
* ALINGMENT_1_FILE_PATH: The path to for_sorted.bam file generated in step 4.
* ALINGMENT_2_FILE_PATH: The path to rev_sorted.bam file generated in step 4.
* MODE: Each mode corresponds to one alignment strategy. The following modes are available:
    * bwa_aln_sr
    * bowtie2_sr_def
    * bowtie2_sr_sensitive

### 6. ImputeCC
Install ImputeCC by following the [Impute installation guide](https://github.com/dyxstat/ImputeCC?tab=readme-ov-file#installation-guide).
<br>
Run:
```
chmod +x imputecc.sh
./imputecc.sh ASSEMBLY_FILE_PATH MODE OUTPUT_PATH
```
* ASSEMBLY_FILE_PATH: The path to final.contigs.fa file generated in step 3.

### 7. CheckM2
CheckM2 can be installed by following the instructions in the [CheckM2 GitHub repository](https://github.com/chklovski/CheckM2). <br>
To assess binning quality, you can use CheckM2 on the FINAL_BIN folder generated by ImputeCC:
```
checkm2 predict --threads 30 --input *.fa --output-directory checkm2_output
```

## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE.md file for details
